K3s VMware Setup (#1192)
medic/cht-docs: content/en/apps/guides/hosting/4.x/self-hosting-k3s-multinode.md

---
title: "k3s - multiple node deployment for VMware"
linkTitle: "k3s - multiple nodes"
weight: 20
description: >
  Hosting the CHT on self run VMware infrastructure for multiple CHT-Core projects that utilize horizontally scaled CouchDB nodes
---

{{% pageinfo %}}
This page details initial k3s cluster setup on a VMware datacenter running vSphere 7+. After initial completion, the administrator should only be adding VMs to the cluster or deploying cht-core projects to be orchestrated.

{{% /pageinfo %}}

### About container orchestration

> A container orchestrater has the ability to schedule projects on available resources spread across a datacenter. For national scale projects, or a large number of cht-core deployments to maintain, we recommend and support using a lightweight kubernetes orchestrator called [k3s](https://docs.k3s.io/). The orchestrator will monitor resources across a group of nodes (VMs), place cht-core projects where there is available resource and migrate projects to spare resources if combined utilization is high or there are underlying issues. Instead of provisioning one VM per cht-core project, we will provision larger VMs and deploy multiple cht-core projects on one VM, with each project receiving optional resource limitations.

Author: yup, [kube-scheduler](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/kube-scheduler/). I think you've defined it 👍

--disable-cloud-controller --kubelet-arg="cloud-provider=external" \ 
--kubelet-arg="provider-id=vsphere://<VM_UUID>"

```

You can verify your cluster is working by running this command from inside your control plane VM:
```
/usr/local/bin/k3s kubectl get nodes -o wide
```

### Agent/Worker VMs

Now we will add our k3s agent/worker servers that will handle cht-core projects, workloads, and containers. This process is the same for any additional Agent/Worker servers you want to add to your k3s cluster.

Ensure that the appropriate roles, and extra configuration parameters are set correctly.

Please fill out these values before running the command:
  - token: Required to be the same token you used above
  - CONTROL_PLANE_IP: The IP of one of the control plane servers you set up above
  - VM_UUID: This is the UUID of this VM that we are adding as an agent/worker server in our k3s cluster

```
curl -sfL https://get.k3s.io | K3S_KUBECONFIG_MODE="644" INSTALL_K3S_EXEC="agent" INSTALL_K3S_VERSION="v1.25.14+k3s1" sh -s - \
--docker --token <TOKEN> \
--server https://<CONTROL_PLANE_IP>:6443 \
--kubelet-arg="cloud-provider=external" \
--kubelet-arg="provider-id=vsphere://<VM_UUID>"

> ```

Author: @mrjones-plip I wasn't sure about this edit. The same formatting is applied for all the varying curl commands (a few lines above and below the optional paramter changes here).

## Deploy VMware Cloud Provisioner Interface (CPI) to your k3s cluster

SSH into one of your control plane servers. 
Download the template for CPI:
```
VERSION=1.25

> wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubernetes/cloud-provider-vsphere/release-1.25/releases/v1.25/vsphere-cloud-controller-manager.yaml

Reviewer: IMHO to realistically complete this process the reader is expected to understand standard *nix file management. Might be worth adding technical prerequisites at the top, but I don't have strong opinions regarding this.

      secretNamespace: kube-system

    # vcenter section
    vcenter:
      my-vc-name:
        server: <vCenter_IP>
        user: <USERNAME>
        password: <PASSWORD>
        datacenters:
          - <Datacenter_name_retrieved_earlier>
```

3) Deploy the template!
```
/usr/local/bin/k3s kubectl -n kube-system apply -f vsphere-cloud-controller-manager.yaml
```

4) Verify CPI containers are running:
```
/usr/local/bin/k3s kubectl -n kube-system get pods -o wide
/usr/local/bin/k3s kubectl -n kube-system logs vsphere-cloud-controller-manager-<id>
```

You will see 3 vsphere-cloud-controller-manager pods running, one per control-plane server.

Take a peak at all 3 vsphere-controller-manager pods logs to ensure nothing is immediately erring. Common errors are using the incorrect datacenter name, UUIDs for VMs in the k3s curl command, or invalid credentials in the configmap and secrets resources created in step 2 above. If one of these errors is displaying in the log, you will want to delete the deployment (in step 3 above, replace `apply` with `delete`, edit the yaml and re-deploy (run step 3 again).

## Deploy VMware Container Storage Interface (CSI) to your k3s cluster

> [VMware documentation for CSI](https://docs.vmware.com/en/VMware-vSphere-Container-Storage-Plug-in/2.0/vmware-vsphere-csp-getting-started/GUID-A1982536-F741-4614-A6F2-ADEE21AA4588.html)
> 
> We'll be following the guide linked above.
> 
> Procedure:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Follow the [VMware documentation for CSI](https://docs.vmware.com/en/VMware-vSphere-Container-Storage-Plug-in/2.0/vmware-vsphere-csp-getting-started/GUID-A1982536-F741-4614-A6F2-ADEE21AA4588.html) with these steps:
```

1) Run the following command from inside a control-plane server:
```
/usr/local/bin/k3s kubectl create namespace vmware-system-csi
```

2) Taint your control-lane node servers by running the following command. This taint may already exist, if so, thats okay. Please replace <CONTROL_PLANE_SERVER> with each of your control plane servers. 
```
You can retrieve the names by running `/usr/local/bin/k3s kubectl get nodes -o wide`
/usr/local/bin/k3s kubectl taint node <CONTROL_PLANE_SERVER> node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane=:NoSchedule
```

> 3) Create kubernetes secret, which will map authentication credentials and datacenter name to CSI containers.
>   a) create a file titled csi-vsphere.conf. In the default values below, be sure to place the following values in the defined place:
>     * admin credentials 
>     * datacenter name retrieved from earlier
>     * vCenter Server IP address (same as used in previous CPI template)
>     * vCenter cluster-ID, retrieved from earlier
> ```
> $ cat /etc/kubernetes/csi-vsphere.conf
> [Global]
> cluster-id = "<cluster-id>"
> 
> [VirtualCenter "<IP or FQDN>"]
> insecure-flag = "<true or false>"
> user = "<username>"
> password = "<password>"
> port = "<port>"
> datacenters = "<datacenter1-path>, <datacenter2-path>, ..."
> ```
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3) Create kubernetes secret, which will map authentication credentials and datacenter name to CSI containers. First, create a file  `/etc/kubernetes/csi-vsphere.conf`. Be sure to replace  `<vCenter_IP>`, `<USERNAME>`, `<PASSWORD>` ,  `<true_or_false>`,  `<PORT>` ,  `<datacenter1-path>` and  `<datacenter1-path>`  with your values:

   
   [Global]
   cluster-id = "<cluster-id>"
   
   [VirtualCenter "<vCenter_IP>"]
   insecure-flag = "<true_or_false>"
   user = "<USERNAME>"
   password = "<PASSWORD>"
   port = "<PORT>"
   datacenters = "<datacenter1-path>, <datacenter2-path>, ..."

```

4) Create the secret resource in the namespace we created in step 1 by running the following command in the same directory you created the csi-vsphere.conf file:
```
/usr/local/bin/k3s kubectl create secret generic vsphere-config-secret --from-file=csi-vsphere.conf --namespace=vmware-system-csi
```

5) Download the [vSphere CSI v2.7.2 template](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubernetes-sigs/vsphere-csi-driver/v2.7.2/manifests/vanilla/vsphere-csi-driver.yaml)

There is one minor edit, typically found on line 217-218, under the deployment specification for vsphere-csi-controller. 

Before edit (original value)
```
      nodeSelector:
        node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane: ""
```

> Please add "true" as the value for this key, seen below:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Please add `true` as the value for this key, seen below:
```

```
      nodeSelector:
        node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane: "true"
```

Now, let's deploy VMware CSI by running the following command:
```
/usr/local/bin/k3s kubectl -n vmware-system-csi apply -f vsphere-csi-driver.yaml
```

Follow the [verification steps seen here in Step 2 of Procedure](https://docs.vmware.com/en/VMware-vSphere-Container-Storage-Plug-in/2.0/vmware-vsphere-csp-getting-started/GUID-54BB79D2-B13F-4673-8CC2-63A772D17B3C.html)

### Create StorageClass in k3s cluster

> We'll need to create a global [StorageClass](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/storage-classes/) resource in our k3s cluster, so cht-core deployments will be able to ask for persistent storage volumes from the k3s cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We'll need to create a global [StorageClass](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/storage-classes/) resource in our k3s cluster, so CHT Core deployments will be able to ask for persistent storage volumes from the k3s cluster.
```

Inside one of the control-plane servers, please create a file `vmware-storageclass.yaml` with the following contents:
```
kind: StorageClass
apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1
metadata:
  name: vmware-sc
  annotations:
    storageclass.kubernetes.io/is-default-class: "true"
provisioner: csi.vsphere.vmware.com
parameters:
  csi.storage.k8s.io/fstype: "ext4" #Optional Parameter
```

Deploy this template to the k3s cluster via:
```
/usr/local/bin/k3s kubectl apply -f vmware-storageclass.yaml
```

## Deploying a CHT-Core Project to your new k3s Cluster running on VMware

This step will neatly fit into helm chart configurations, but here are the manual steps for time being.

> In your PVC template (peristent volume), here is a snippet of what it should resemble for all CouchDB's:
> * Note the storageClassName parameter should be identical to the storageClass we deployed earlier

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Your persistent volume (PVC) template for all CouchDB's should be as shown below. Note the `storageClassName` parameter should be identical to the `storageClass` we deployed earlier:
```

* [Persistent Volume Claim](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/) - This is where our project data will be stored. Important to ensure you have configured this correctly, with retain policies intact so the data is not deleted if the project is removed. It's also vital to ensure you have a backup policy either set-up in VMware vCenter GUI or you have configured the csi-snapshotter that comes with vSphere CSI.
* [Services](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/) - This is utilized for CouchDB nodes to discover each other through DNS rather than internal IPs, which can change. This is also used in the COUCH_URL so API containers can discover where CouchDB is running.

> ## k3s Troubleshooting
> Another doc to be linked here

Reviewer 2: We can add this content when we have it, until then, we'll just remove the place holder.

```suggestion
```

      
      
* Inside the JSON response of the `curl` call get the,  `instance_uuid`, in this case it's `215cc603-e8da-5iua-3333-a2402c05121`, but yours will be different:
      
      "identity":{"name":"k3s_worker_node_4","instance_uuid":"215cc603-e8da-5iua-3333-a2402c05121"
      

* Retrieve your datacenter name, to be used in configuration files for VMware CSI and CPI
      
      curl -k -X GET -H "vmware-api-session-id: $ID" https://<vCenter_IP>/rest/vcenter/datacenter
      
You will want to save the "name" of your datacenter.

* Retrieve your cluster-id, to be used in config file for VMware CSI
      
      curl -k -X GET -H "vmware-api-session-id: $ID" https://<vCenter IP>/api/vcenter/cluster
      

You can also use the [govc cli tool](https://github.com/vmware/govmomi/blob/main/govc/README.md#binaries) to retrieve this information:
   
   export GOVC_INSECURE=1
   export GOVC_URL='https://<USERNAME>:<PASSWORD>@<vCenter_IP>
   
   govc ls /
        <datacenter-name>/vm \
        <datacenter-name>/network \
        <datacenter-name>/host \
        <datacenter-name>/datastore 
   
   #To retrieve all Node VMs
   govc ls /<datacenter-name>/vm \

>        <datacenter-name>/vm/<vm-name1> \

Reviewer: The tags disappears for me in the preview, does it look correctly in when rendered by the static site generator?

Minor: I'd prefer to wrap all code lines in backticks (replace `shell` with the language that is most appropriate or leave blank)
````
```shell
code goes here...
```
````
 or for shorter sections
`` `code goes here...` ``
